obviously on the northern beaches it's
more paramount but if you're catching
public transport you need to be wearing
a mask
if you're going grocery shopping or
indoor shopping in a mall or anywhere
else you need to be wearing a mask
in those indoor settings that health is
already identified you should be wearing
a mask in particular if it's a place of
worship
we already know what the high-risk areas
are we know what the high-risk areas of
transmission and the high-risk
activities are we ask people to respond
accordingly don't think you're immune
this can affect any of us
and we know from the cases not just in
the last few days but previously how
absolutely contagious
this virus is how absolutely essential
it is for us to get on top of it and
because health still doesn't know yet
what the intermediary cases were
where the source of the spread in the
community is we have to be as vigilant
as ever
new research by the army questions
whether australia has the industrial
capability to scale up for war
or other emergencies such as bushfires
and pandemics it looks at whether
australia has the potential to leverage
its existing capabilities and redirect
capabilities into areas of need in the
future
for more on the research i'm joined now
by professor of international security
and
intelligence studies at the anu
professor john blacksland
john blackstone thank you so much for
your time where are the vulnerabilities
in australia's army in this respect
well the problem that is identified with
this paper
is that australia
has essentially a bit implicit in the
paper
uh australia has essentially got a
capability that was designed for
peacetime for a post-cold war
relatively benign set of circumstances
and what we've seen witness in the last
12 months or so
is a combination of you know what
people are calling a crisis relating to
pandemics to climate to
great power contestation and here we're
talking essentially
the competition between china the united
states and a range of crises in our
neighborhood in the pacific and
southeast asia
that uh it means that what we've been
able to do in the past
really is probably not going to be
enough for the future
and we've even this year we've seen the
adf the australian defense force
you know stand up to the demands for
additional
support for the pandemic crisis
in various states around australia
earlier in the year we had the fires and
the adf responded to that
the adf can do all of that um but it's
not actually
postured and it's not resourced to uh
substantially increase
and deal with a range of crises that
might happen
concurrently we've been dealing with
them consecutively up until this point
and
arguably we're not in a position to do
that in the future
this paper kind of examines some of the
fundamental issues about
resilience about how the nation is
postured to
capitalize on its relative advantage uh
with its uh
primary industries essentially noting of
course the the real
significant limitations when it comes to
our industrial capabilities
and the significant vulnerabilities
there it also kind of capitalizes a
little bit on the
observations that have been made in the
last few years about how countries like
south korea and japan have suffered at
the brunt of china's sharp power
diplomacy
uh south korea suffered at the uh when
they
allowed the americans to base their
theater high altitude air defense
weapon systems designed to defend south
korea against the
north korean threat but the chinese took
offence to that and therefore imposed
significant sanctions
on the on the koreans similarly the
japanese a few years ago suffered
uh significant um rare earth mineral
limitations from china uh that they had
cornered the market for
uh and all been indicators and australia
of course what's been happening the last
few months
has reinforced this concern that
australia does need to be better
postured
to be more self-reliant more resilient
bit more able to look after itself
the review looks at things like prepared
food manufactured metal products medical
products
and clothing does this go to the heart
of one of the issues that came up this
year when the pandemic arose
that australia's domestic manufacturing
capacity
is simply not there that we bring in too
many items and products from china
economy here uh and we've been pretty
happy with that it's worked pretty well
and when everything's been benign
uh and when people have been cooperative
and collaboratively working with
each other that's that's been okay what
we're finding of course is that
we're dealing now with a range of
factors uh environmental and we're
talking about here looming environmental
catastrophe
potentially uh coupled that with great
power competition
couple that with pandemics and then a
range of other crises that could unfold
in the neighborhood
all of a sudden
you know tim fine a little while ago
isn't necessarily fine today
so should australians be worried
um worried is not i think something we
need to do right now
i mean i think what we need to do is
have our our defense
and strategy folk and our our industry
our industrial leaders looking to uh the
future this is something australia's not
very good at we tend to be
fairly short-sighted
and we look at nomi's that we can muster
locally
but essentially we need to be looking
inter-generationally into the future
what we might need in 10 20 years time
and be positioning
ourselves for that and of course we some
of that we might need
in the near term and that could be in
so this is a it's a timely report it's
important for us to think about
uh what this means for how we as a
nation posture
for the spectrum of challenges that lie
ahead relating to great power
contestation
looming environmental challenges and a
crest a range of governance challenges
and
potential crises in our neighborhood
blacks linda thanks so much for your
time
thank you karina so just
let you know what we have coming up over
the course of the afternoon we are
standing by you can see in the bottom of
the screen
to bring you the victorian premier
daniel andrews
to respond to the findings of the kota
inquiry
that inquiry was set up to investigate
what led to
the second wave in victoria the hotel
quarantine breaches that led to that
second wave that resulted in 801
deaths and 18 000 infections that review
ended up costing
tens of millions of dollars i think we
can
take you live now to melbourne where the
victorian premier daniel andrews is
speaking
everyone ready to go that's cute
first and foremost today marks 52 days
since we had a locally quiet case of
coronavirus
in victoria that is an amazing
achievement and one that
every victorian can be proud of i'm
obliged though to point out that
whilst 52 days is very impressive and
the product of a lot of hard work and
commitment by
victorians across the state that's not
the same as a vaccine being here so we
all need to
as we work through this christmas week
and into
summer holidays we need to be vigilant
around
all the rules and playing our part to
keep this virus at bay
in terms of additional cases there is
one new case reported
to the department in the last 24 hours
and that person is
safely tucked away in quarantine
that brings to a total of 13 active
cases all of which are in the quarantine
system
a total of 13 695 test results were
received today
that is a very strong number for a
sunday
and i thank each and every one of those
more than 13 and a half thousand
victorians for going getting tested
it's exactly how we stay ahead of this
virus it's exactly how we protect you
your family and every single family
we have to keep those numbers up right
throughout the summer
as you know judge coate has handed down
her
second and final report her enquiry
into a hotel quarantine first of all can
i thank
former judge coat for her work and the
work of all of her team
made more challenging by the fact that
of course with coronavirus restrictions
that work had to be done
in very unusual ways remotely and
we are very grateful for her 500 page
report
and the many thousands of hours of work
that she and her team have done
this report was this process was
established in order to give us the
answers that we were all as victorians
entitled to
what has occurred is
a very detailed report at the outset it
is their intention to accept all the
recommendations
that judge coate has made i say
intention
because we just have to work through
some of the detail of some of the
recommendations that she has made
but it is our preference and our
intention and we'll spend the summer to
consider the report in more detail
many of those recommendations have
already occurred we're already doing
that work for instance testing every
single member of staff
and their household contacts every day
and weekly
there are others that we've already
basically done that important work made
those important changes
at the outset beyond that statement of
intention to
implement all of those findings all
those important recommendations
i want to apologize to the victorian
community for the very clear errors that
were made
in this program i think that the way in
which the program was established it had
to be done quickly that's the nature of
a global pandemic there is no rule book
as such
i think decisions about who worked in
the program is less an issue it is more
a matter and the report finds this
the lack of that very detailed oversight
checking double checking triple checking
looking very closely every day at what's
occurring in hotel quarantine that is
where
the significant breach of hotel
quarantine comes from and the resulting
transmission
comes out of hotel quarantine a number
of families at large gatherings then it
seeds into large workplaces and back and
forth
and then we have a a wave that simply
could not be pulled up without putting
very significant restrictions on
for that i am sorry we are sorry our
commitment and my commitment
as the leader of the government is to
learn those lessons
and to make sure that an error like this
that lack of oversight that lack of
due diligence to check and double check
that things are as they should be and
then if a problem is found it is found
early rather than being found too late
that is my commitment we will do that
work much of it has already been done
and these lessons this critical lesson
about oversight
and more direct management of
significant risks is not just a factor
or a feature of a global pandemic
it's something that i think is an
important lesson to learn in many
different contexts
to give you one example if i could turn
back the clock and receive daily reports
on what happens in hotel quarantine as i
do now
then of course i would if
we could have a system of oversight
that was i think the best in the country
back then as we do now then of course
we would put those steps in place but
none of us have
the the ability to change history
we can only learn those lessons and make
sure that
the reforms and the changes that are
essential are made
to make it far less likely
that these sorts of errors could ever
occur again
just quickly whether it's testing every
member of staff every day
whether it's having no contractors
regardless of what industry they work in
working in
hotel quarantine instead every employee
is an employee of the victorian
government and an exclusive
employee of the victorian government
there are no second jobs there's no
moonlighting
whether it's embedding a deputy chief
health officer in
the the administrative office covert
quarantine victoria to have an embedded
public health
response every hour of every day not
just when there are problems
but in the prevention of those problems
in the first place
and many other examples we have
established
a new hotel quarantine system
that if we had our time again
we would go back and we would make sure
that that oversight that vigilance that
sense of real-time monitoring of
problems
was a feature of the scheme that was set
up all those months
ago we can't do that we can only learn
those lessons
offer our sympathies and condolence to
everyone both those who lost a loved one
in the first wave
and those who lost a loved one in the
second all we can do is offer our
support
our sincere apology our sorrow at their
loss this will be
an incredibly difficult week there will
be
there will be people missing from the
christmas dinner table
on friday and i am deeply sorry
and saddened by that but my commitment
is to not only apologize because
apologies are very important
particularly
when you mean it but to also offer my
commitment
to make sure that we do everything we
possibly can
to learn these lessons and make sure
that these sort of
mistakes these sorts of failings can
never be repeated again
as i said at the outset it is our
intention to implement all of the
recommendations that judge coate has put
forward
i wish i could give you an iron clad on
that we just have to work through a
couple of small details for instance you
would remember
that from the first report there was a
recommendation to not have hotel
quarantine but to instead have returned
travelers going home
if we had done that that would have been
inconsistent with the national cabinet
decision
and therefore we would run the risk of
uh of borders being close to victoria
for instance
you can never make hotel quarantine zero
risk
we've seen that in adelaide we're seeing
it in sydney at the moment
we've seen it in new zealand we've seen
it in lots of different parts of the
world
what we can do and what we have to do
and what my government
must do is learn these lessons
make these changes and do everything we
can
to make sure that we do not have a third
wave
that is my commitment that's what i'm
spending every hour
of every day doing we can't go back we
can't change what occurred
we can only learn those painful tragic
lessons
and do everything possible to avoid a
third wave that is what we are doing
and that is the leadership and the
commitment and the hard work
that we are focused on we are now happy
to take any questions you have
one of the things the report clearly
states is that no one is responsible
for hiring private security not hiring
the decision to use private security how
does that see the world who is
responsible
for that decision to use private
security not police sure
sure i think there are a couple of
points here uh if you look at the reset
program there are no private security
because i just don't think victorians
would have confidence in those
arrangements in the reset
there are no private security and there
are no contractors for instance cleaners
are only working to clean uh hotels
that are involved in the covert 19
quarantine
they're not working anywhere else
they're not working for anyone else
they're working for us victoria police
are playing that
enforcement role making sure that the
place is as secure as possible
if i had my time again within that
meeting at the state control centre that
state control team meeting that judge
coate refers to
quite clearly i would prefer that police
had been chosen to do that work
now having said that though the second
point is this
the mere engagement of private security
is i think
in the judgment of the report and common
sense tells you given that there are
three and a half thousand private
security working
in sydney hotel quarantine alone and
they play roles in lots of other capital
cities across our nation that is
less the issue it is the failure to
oversight them
to in real time minute by minute monitor
whether they're doing a good bad or
indifferent job or others in the hotel
quarantine
quarantine system not just those doing
security
cleaning or every every feature of it
should have been and currently is
under the reset much more closely
monitored
if i could go back and get a daily
update as i do now
about everything that's going on in
hotel quarantine i would
and what that would have meant is we
spotted problems earlier
and we could have acted earlier the mere
employment of private security
uh is less the issue it's the failure to
oversight them
and others in the important work that
they were doing
that saw the virus get out and then saw
all of us take too long to establish
that fact
and take by the time it was apparent it
had already spread
so deeply it had seeded so deeply into
the victorian community the melbourne
community
uh that it simply couldn't be pulled up
without the
the rule changes that we painfully but
absolutely had to
had to put in place i mean that didn't
actually answer the fundamental question
about
the decision-making process all the
other points you've made available the
decision-making process to get to that
point
of lets victoria use private security as
the first tier
enforcement this report hasn't answered
that question are you able to answer
that question well no the report very
clearly which the report speaks to a
meeting
and a group of people's not politicians
because these are deeply operational
matters
a group of very same governments
that's the point that i'm making very
senior group of people
who sat around and whether it's by a
process of
i suppose people had excluded themselves
from that work victoria police
preferred a model where they were a
backup they were not the primary
security workforce uh it's the
i think judge coat's very clear uh on
the forum the timing and the nature of
that
that judgment what i'm saying to you is
that this is less about who was engaged
it is more about the fact that there was
not appropriate oversight
of them and all that were engaged to do
this work
whether it be oversight of
of some of the victoria police that were
involved oversight of private security
oversight of cleaners
oversight of everybody across all
the hotel quarantine hotels that's the
key failing here
and that's what we have remedied you
know if i
could then get the daily report that i
get now
then of course i would and i would
prefer
i would require that i had that detailed
information in an ongoing sense
because that would allow us then armed
with that knowledge of
any problem to take action so that
things did not escalate and finish up
fundamentally
with the virus running wild the only
remedy to which is to lock the place
down
we have learnt those lessons we have
made those changes and we will carefully
consider all the recommendations that
judge code has made
if there are further changes that we
need to make we'll be speaking with
judge coates team
so that we fully understand all of those
we'll have more to say over the course
of the summer
but we're very confident that the
arrangements we have in place now learn
those lessons there may be some
extra things to do but we'll take the
time to consider those properly but how
is it acceptable whether it's hotel
quarantine
or any realm of government policy that
an official can express a preference
and by the end of the day by osmosis
that's
government policy without any reference
to a minister or yourself or
someone elected well that's that's
exactly the point that judge kate makes
and she makes recommendations that the
public service commissioner look at
those issues and many different issues
but that's part of it
this whole notion you need that depth of
i mean it's it's pretty simple the
notion of ministerial responsibility
isn't it well
i just i'm not disagreeing with you
james but i think we need to be careful
when you speak about officials
different officials have different
positions at law if the police
commissioner expresses a view
i can't direct the police commission i
want no one can so that's slightly
different to an official who say a
deputy secretary right
there are there are differences what we
have learnt
and what is what is not acceptable to me
that decisions are made and there is not
follow-up and oversight to make sure
that they are working properly
that is not acceptable that is why we
had this process to determine exactly
the points at which the system broke
down the origins of the errors
and the mistakes that have been tragic
and that have caused
so much pain and done so much damage we
understand those
weaknesses those errors now and we have
a steely resolve and a commitment
to remedy those errors those
cultural problems those administrative
problems
to ensure that this can never regardless
of the circumstance
happen again that's where we find
ourselves today and we will take the
time over summer to look in great detail
at the recommendations that have been
made
and to make sure that we implement them
that is our intention
we would commit fully today but we just
have to work through what the
ramifications of some of those changes
would be but i think it is likely
and it is my preference to implement all
of them
[Music]
a premier judge speaks of a complex and
at times inexplicable internal
governance structures in dhhs that serve
to complicate and off the state
reporting lines and accountabilities
rather than create clarity of role
definition and lines of command
you've spoken about what you're doing
within hotel quarantine to address that
lack of a line of accountability what
are you doing elsewhere within the
government sure public service
so very it's a very good question rachel
teams work best when every member of the
team knows what their role and function
is
what their part of the strategy the game
plan is
it's very clear to me that in dhhs and
perhaps in some other parts of
government
there was not that clarity of role
people did not have a clear
understanding of what their
job was what their part to play was
i think that leadership changes in that
department are
important because there is a cultural
change that needs to be made there
the announcements i made some time ago
which are effective from february 1
the splitting of that department so that
the health department can be focused on
health issues including public health
and that a department a second
department
can be focused on things like our record
boost in housing
child protection a whole range of other
family violence prevention a whole range
of other very important matters
but matters that should have a specific
focus i think that
you're right to point it out and i think
we've been right to act in pretty clear
terms
now will that happen in one day or one
week no i think there are some
significant changes that need to be made
there
and that's where we leave viewers on abc
television if you want to continue
watching switch over to the abc news
channel
this global pandemic and it'll be even
harder for those who have lost a loved
one
but there are every day there are there
are different challenges
and that clarity of purpose that
organizational structure
where people can be effective and
accountable is very very important for
instance the ses today are reporting
flash flooding in a whole range of
regional areas we're into the fire
season
we will have to confront tomorrow and
and every day different challenges and
that clarity
is absolutely important
well i'm prepared to say that that uh
that change made out of
i think a recognition that many of the
clients many of the
victorians who engage with health and
human services are in fact the same
people
and that there could be a better level
of service
and an improvement in outcomes
particularly for vulnerable victorians
that's what motivated us to make that
change uh but i i think it is
appropriate at this
time not just from what's come from the
coat report but for a range of other
reasons
to have a more dedicated focus health
department
for health including public health
and particularly given the mental health
reform work that we're doing and the
minister for mental health is here
that's now got a much bigger agenda it
was always big but it's got bigger again
uh and if you look at the more than five
billion dollars for investing in social
housing for instance that itself
paul has now leave daniel andrew
speaking in melbourne to take you to
canberra where the prime minister scott
morrison is speaking
uh selection process congratulations
paul and but as you know he's been doing
an outstanding job now and
acting in that role for many months and
he will update you on matters
uh just in a few minutes 2020 is not
done with us yet that's very clear
nor should we be surprised
the events of the past few days i have
no doubt
are incredibly frustrating and
disappointing
for people all around the country who
had plans in place to get together
and moving between states and the
restrictions in sydney of only 10 people
in a home all very sensible but i
understand
that it will be disappointing and
frustrating because of the disruptions
that have taken place
and i have no doubt that the premiers
feel the same way
but the actions that are being taken and
necessary as we look around the world we
know what's happening
and we know that we have to be cautious
and the great gains that have been made
at great sacrifice and at great cost
over the course of this year we intend
to
maintain them and that means that in
circumstances like this as we have done
so now
on many occasions we need to act swiftly
as is occurring
as the authorities get on top of this
and ensure that we can preserve the
gains
and ensure that we can go into 2021 in a
in a good state the viruses have
often reminded everyone it doesn't go
anywhere it's still there
it's a global pandemic and as a result
outbreaks will occur from time to time
you remember the crossroads outbreak
northern tasmania
adelaide just a few weeks ago of course
what occurred in melbourne
even smaller outbreaks have occurred in
brisbane and many other places
it's how you respond to the outbreaks
that matters the outbreaks
are things that are going to continue to
occur
and while great care is taken all around
the country
then we can never fully rule out that an
outbreak might occur
at some point in time in this case
what we're seeing is both great
cooperation
as we've seen in other places before but
the geography i've got to tell you is
helping us as well those of you
who know sydney will know that the
peninsula
is a very cohesive and a
community that tends to keep to itself a
bit like the shire down where
my where i'm from and that is certainly
i think assisting
in making sure that the avalon outbreak
is is staying exactly
where it is and the premier has already
gone through at great length
with the chief health officer in new
south wales about where things are are
today but we do welcome the fact
now that we've seen a reduction in those
new cases
in that 24-hour period that's no
guarantee of tomorrow or the next day
after that but it isn't certainly much
better than the alternative
and as we as we go into these next few
days we'll be watching carefully
as we endeavor to understand whether
there's been further seating if there's
been any seating i should say there
hasn't been any at this point
in other parts of the city or other
places and i'm sure professor kelly will
make this point as well
if you're from that affected area in the
avalon outbreak in
northern beaches of sydney if you were
there
over the past fortnight and you happen
to be somewhere else now
if you're in adelaide if you're in
queensland
if you're indeed here in the act or
somewhere else
then the rules about isolation apply
equally to you as they do
uh to those of your neighbors who are
back in avalon in the northern beaches
right now
and i think that's a very important
point and i we we seek people's
cooperation i think the the speed at
which the new south wales
authorities have been able to get on top
of this and understand
the extent of the of the community
transmission and all those places
has been outstanding and that is greatly
assisting them
in managing this outbreak and that will
continue i should note
as the professor kelly did on friday
that the the avalon outbreak does
qualify
under the national hotspot definition
and that's been the case for several
days now
and so therefore the precautionary
actions taken in other jurisdictions
is understandable in that context let's
hope
that they won't be required for long
let's hope that what we see here in new
south wales and i think there's good
cause for that hope
on what we're seeing having just spoken
again to the new south wales premier
this morning
there is good cause i think they have
hope that if they continue
to apply themselves in the way they are
and the cooperation continues
then we can hopefully see things
returned to covert normal
as soon as we possibly could hope to see
that occur
one of the very uh encouraging elements
of the response so far has been the
community response was some 38 000 tests
conducted yesterday
that's a record what that shows is
people are listening
and they're coming forward all of those
test results are incredibly helpful to
the authorities as they get on top of
this
and manage to map the impacts
of this community transmission we're
already seeing
that some of those who are identified as
having the virus were already in
isolation
they'd already isolated themselves as a
result of the precautionary approach
that had been advised by the health
authorities and that shows you
that the system is working the
turnaround on testing
uh same day um we will know of anecdotal
evidence
of people getting turnarounds and tests
in a number of hours some it's taken a
bit longer than that
but the same day turn around the ability
to ensure that they're running
tracing to ground within those 48 hour
periods
these are key metrics that are being hit
and very essential
to the response just quickly on the
issue of
aged care there are no cases in any aged
care facilities in these affected areas
in fact there are none
in the country there is one case where
there was a visitor but i'm advised
that that visitor was wearing masks when
they were visiting that that
individual and at this stage there is no
suggestion that there has been any
virus infection at that site or any
other sites
that said we have put in place the
single site working arrangements
support for the facilities in the
affected areas in addition to that
we're also doubling down on the support
provided for ppe
and other supports through the aged care
facilities to ensure
that those facilities on infection
control and the other matters are being
well attended to
i've already mentioned the testing on
the commonwealth thunder gp respiratory
clinics
all across new south wales and the ict
we've agreed to request to allow
asymptomatic testing and that will
continue for as long
as it needs to that testing is proving
also
very helpful with new south wales
authorities
on tracking the course of the community
transmission
in defence i should note that we have
some 1298
defence force personnel who are deployed
to supporting
our priority which is hotel quarantine
that includes 342 offices
in new south wales 284 in queensland 150
in victoria
and the other numbers i can make
available to those who are seeking them
some 1 600 adf personnel
are directly involved in the effort all
around
the country we will be providing
response to the request some additional
logistics
and other support to the victorian
government to support their border
operations but that does not extend to
actual patrolling of the borders that's
not something the defense force is
doing any longer that will be done by
state
state officials and supported through
the adf with their logistics and other
planning experience but our major
priority for adf
is actually on the hotel quarantine and
that's where i think we can add the most
value and that's certainly the view
of uh the uh adf and general fruin
who was responding and assessing each of
those cases i also note
the pandemic leave disaster payment for
those who
are in new south wales and having to
take tests and have to isolate
themselves that continues to be
available
some 18 million dollars has been paid
out
in that payment since it was first
introduced to australians and australian
residents
16 million of that i know it was
actually paid in victoria
and so in new south wales for those who
need to access that payment
they can access that payment and
hopefully that will be of great use
to you the only other thing i was going
to note today
was that tomorrow's swearing-in ceremony
we will be doing virtually bringing
people from around the country to the
ict including from sydney
we don't think it's a wise decision and
so alternative arrangements have been
made with the governor general
and we will arrange another suitable
time for a
formal uh ceremony uh later in january
but uh
the official uh swearing in to enable
those changes to the ministry will take
place tomorrow
and those arrangements will become
active after that
swearing in so with that
i might pass over to professor kelly um
thank you pm so just to uh
add on a couple of uh extras to what the
pm's already said
the the key element of the of the what
has now been called the avalon outbreak
uh and that's that's important to
consider that this is very localized
at the moment and as the pms mentioned
that part of the
northern beaches is is quite insular
actually they
tend to stay where they are in that
peninsula
so all of the cases so far all of them
the 80 um 83 locally acquired cases that
have happened
since the 17th of december in new south
wales have been linked back to that
cluster so most of them are living in
avalon
newport and surrounding suburbs and
almost all of them have had either a
direct link or an indirect link
to those events that happened in the rsl
on the 11th and the the bowling club in
avalon
on the 13th of december so just to go
through those numbers and this is
this is an important thing to think
about not just the daily numbers
but the trend so on the 17th of december
we had three cases
on the 18th of december we had 15 cases
on the 19th of december we had
uh so 18th of december 15 19th of
december 23
20th of december the 30th uh 30 and
today
15. so it's gone up it's come down
it may go up again we can't absolutely
guarantee that but at the moment the
trend is good
uh and crucially um despite the
the fact that we had thirty eight
thousand five hundred and seventy eight
uh okay um tests yesterday um
that's all we found was 15 and they were
all linked uh to
that particular cluster um that's a huge
response from the community and
a real shout out to the people of of
greater sydney but particularly
the northern beaches it's almost
quadrupled the number of average daily
tests
as was occurring two weeks ago so that's
an enormous response
and people are coming forward and that's
something we need to absolutely stress
anyone who has been to any of those
places
that has been mentioned on the new south
wales health website
they should take on that advice isolate
get tested
if that's the case and then that's how
we know whether it whether
it has spread further um for those uh
anyone in in sydney particularly at the
moment but
throughout the country please um
download the covert safe app if you have
not already done so make sure it's
switched on
and secondly if you go to a place that
has a qr code
check in use it that's how we can really
get on top of these issues
if anyone has been to those those venues
that's how we know who else has been
there and we can get that done
quickly for those of you that are now
going
not going to be able to share a family
christmas it's it's the same for me
um and so make sure you you check in on
your family make sure they're keeping
well
and that and look at virtual ways as the
pm has said if it works for the
ministers being sworn in we can have
virtual christmases we've had that
all through this year we're very very
good at that so make sure you do keep in
touch with your family don't uh
be separated at this time even though
you physically can't be there
thanks thanks paul so look we've been
here before
we've been able to come overcome this
before
including in new south wales new south
wales i should stress hasn't sought any
additional support at this point
um they've they've got it covered um but
the premier is aware of what's available
to her if she needs it
i should note that in victoria
particularly the support the defence is
providing is in defence accommodation
for those who are involved
in addressing those border issues the
medical expert panel is meeting every
day
paul will chair that meeting again this
afternoon the transport ministers
were meeting today pulled together by
the deputy prime minister and that's
just to ensure that the freight code
continues to operate with these
um border changes coming in over the
last sort of 48 hours
uh the health ministers will be meeting
on wednesday
and if there is a need for a meeting of
the national cabinet we didn't meet when
especially when the adelaide outbreak
occurred i think there's a few more days
of data
and these other meetings i think
addressing the operational issues here
i haven't had any direct requests from
any of the premise for that to occur
i've noted there's been a bit of
commentary in the media
but that said i mean national cabinet
can can
come together but with the medical
experts actually meeting and advising
them
they're getting all that information
direct they've made their calls
when it comes to the precautionary
arrangements on the border
restrictions they've put in place and i
think
after a couple more days we'll know a
bit more and if there is a need to do
that well of course we can do that
do it on christmas eve industry you can
do it on christmas day
but between now and then i think we'll
allow those who have the job of
advising and taking the operational
decisions to just get on with it
as a result of this avalon cluster state
borders state premier's closed their
borders
we're not going to have a vaccine widely
available until in australia until the
end of next year is it your expectation
now that every time we see a cluster pop
up in this country
state premiers are going to close their
borders restrictions will be imposed and
the country will for a short time go
backwards again well the vaccine will be
available in march not at the end of
next year
well it'll take it'll take some months
for it to work its way through the
population but
it's i know poor but still there hasn't
been the emergency
authorisation in the united kingdom as
yet and i can assure australians
that i will not be putting their health
at risk
in the way we manage the both the
approval and the deployment of the
vaccine
it must be safe it must follow all of
those rules
i note that in australia we have the
highest one of the highest
vaccination rates in the world and that
is because of the trust they place in
the system
and their expectation of me and indeed
the
secretary of the department of health
and the health minister and professor
scared at the
tga is that we follow all of those
processes very very diligently
now as i said before we have a hot spot
in avalon
we have a hot spot in northern beaches
and when you have hot spots then
you respond to those with restrictions
that is the way
this has been successfully managed
anywhere in the world and australia is
no different to that
the ultimate decisions that states make
are sovereign matters for them
as i've said to you before the states
they determine their own definition of a
hot spot
and what restrictions they put in place
we have sought to get a national
approach to that
the states and territories have chosen
that they want to retain
their flexibility to set those issues
for their individual states and
territories
they have the constitutional power to do
that in the new year if there is a way
to get further streamlining of that
and consistency well my door is always
open
uh to have those discussions but now i
can assure you though the states
have a very strong view about retaining
their fl their
decision making power over those issues
they are responsible
public health in their states and so
that is understandable
but as we deal with the virus it is
unpredictable
it does do this and how you respond is
very important
so long as it is done transparently and
efficiently
and as quickly as the northern territory
has been doing this now for months and
months and months
they will have areas go on and off
a hot spot list in a matter of days if
not weeks
and that process in the northern
territory has worked extremely
efficiently
and that's what the commonwealth view of
a national hot spot
has been based on that northern
territory experience you can't ignore
hot spots you can't pretend they're not
there and they don't present areas of
course they present a risk and until
we have a vaccine that is reaching the
necessary levels
that is required across the country then
these are the ways that we'll have to
practically
manage these issues but the difference
between
now and when we were dealing with
outbreaks six seven months ago
is like is is night and day and i think
that's what we'll continue to see in new
south wales and days ahead
are you disappointed that we won't be
open by christmas have we as we formally
hope i couldn't quite hear you sorry
are you disappointed that we won't be
open by christmas as you formally hoped
and also do you think
this most recent outbreak will have any
material impact on the economic
situation of the country
well on the first point i'm like any
other australian of course we wanted
everything to be opened by christmas but
the virus
has had a different idea about that and
that's just a practical reality
um and i should say though in seven
states and territories
we certainly will be having christmas in
this country like few countries in the
world are
and so you know every christmas is a
time to be thankful
and while there are frustrations and
disappointments and disruptions this
christmas
i think here in australia we have a lot
to be thankful for and a lot to be
grateful for and that
those people who we are able to join
with uh are the most
important things we should be grateful
for and so that
that will go ahead uh either directly or
as paul says
virtually and so i think we have to keep
that in some sort of perspective
on the economic issue well i mean it's
still too early i mean
what we're looking at here is a an
outbreak in in one
quite geographically defined part of
sydney which at the moment
is not uh suggesting broader seating and
uh
having a broader impact now as the as
the chief medical officer says you can't
guarantee it it won't take a different
course uh but that's it if it would
continue on that way just like we saw
with the adelaide
uh um outbreak a few weeks ago then
you know these things would have a very
minimal impact uh on those economic
scenarios in the short term though of
course it's highly disruptive there's no
doubt about
comments that christmas do a few days
away are you praying for a christmas
miracle
and also is there a need to reconsider
or even consider any travel restrictions
from the uk given the mutated strain
i'll let paul deal with that why don't
you do with that um uh
item first paul and and and then i'll
share my prayer diary with the
with the gallery so on the on the new
strain in
in the uk i think we need to put it in
context firstly
uh there has been thousands of mutations
in this of this particular
novel coronavirus when it was you
remember that was what it was called
at the beginning it was a new
coronavirus it had a mutation to get to
there
uh and there is there have been small
mutations along the way but thousands of
them
the particular strain in which is
circulating especially in the southeast
of england at the moment does
uh have some particular mutations
related to the spike protein
that's important because that is the way
that the virus gets into the cells
it's also the particular part of the
virus that the vaccines
are attacking all of the vaccines are
related to the spike protein
having said that there's no definite
evidence at the moment that this this is
a significant change
there has been more transmission in
recent times in
in southeast of uh of the uk
um and that's may be associated with the
with the viruses
uh there is certainly more transmission
going on but that is also
related to the few weeks before
christmas so the way i look at this
as with every infectious disease there
are three things going on there is an
environment
a host that's humans and the infectious
agent
so the infectious agent has changed a
little
there are a lot of people moving around
in southeast england have been until
this
recent lockdown it's also winter so
those
those all three are important elements
to consider
in terms of what that means for people
coming from the uk here
everyone coming from the uk is going
into into 14 days of hotel quarantine
uh and they are no risk uh as as that
quarantine works
uh so successfully as it has done for
the most part here in australia since
the beginning
well miracles happen every day in
australia and
small and large and i think christmas is
time to give thanks for those that we
we know of prime minister
the review into the problems with
the hotel quarantine in victoria their
findings are out today
they conclude that no person or agency
claimed any responsibility for the
decision to use private security as the
first tier of security
and all vigorously disputed the
possibility they could have played a
part
in the decision um do you think that's a
credible finding
is there a problem now with the lack of
accountability about the failures of
hotel quarantine in victoria
what matters most is that we learned the
lessons from what happened
not just on that occasion but there have
been many events and incidents that have
caused
occurred over the course of this
pandemic and my focus
has been along with with my team is to
just learn from each
and every occasion on quarantine we as a
national cabinet uh
at our instigation we initiated the
halton review that has gone round and
checked
right across the country and there have
been significant improvements on the on
the tracing we had
we had dr finkel do something very
similar and we've seen major
improvements
that have come from that you know in the
middle of a pandemic
you just have to focus on making sure
you learn the lessons and you get it
right going forward
and i honestly think the best way i can
continue to do that job is just by
keeping looking forward
learning whatever we can from those
experiences i mean i go back
you know when we were dealing with the
outbreak in northern tasmania i was down
in tasmania i was down
down in devonport just a few days ago
and reflecting on that with premier
gutwood
i mean and i spoke to a doctor who was
involved up in that outbreak on that
occasion
and you know there were things that were
learned from from that experience and
that
translated to the next one and so on
each occasion we're
now here with what is of course a
serious um
outbreak in avalon but with the tools
and capability
to deal with it better than we have in
previous outbreaks
so you know i they've made their report
they've made their findings others will
judge that in the victorian context and
for the victorian government
that's a matter for them what i'm
focused on is working and supporting
every single government in this country
leading
from our government to ensure we put in
place the best possible response
on each and every occasion paul you're
being very patient today prime minister
what progress
has been made to strengthen the
standards for quarantine of
international air crew
and why did it take until december to
decide that the crew should be in fewer
airports and fewer hotels closer to the
airports
well the others what's been a
combination of practices by the states
as you may know i mean some states
already were quarantining
air crews in one hotel new south wales
is moving to that
i should stress though new south wales
takes
half the international arrivals to
australia
every week so new south wales has been
carrying
the lion's share of the burden of
getting australians home
three thousand even now every week
despite the challenges they're facing
now new south wales
continues to do everything it can to get
australians home and they're not just
from new south wales
they're from all the other states and
territories victoria is still only at 1
000.
great to see them come up and
discussions i've had with the premier
will see that happen when it's safe to
do so
but new south wales keeps carrying that
burden great to see that
in queensland they've got up to about
1300 a week and
and then wa it's just over a thousand
that's great but new south wales
continues to carry the heaviest burden
on quarantining international arrivals
into this country
and that means they have more aircrew
they have more pilots
they have more challenges in managing
that than any other state or territory
in the commonwealth and so the
arrangements they're putting in place
now i spoke to the health minister in
new south wales but has a about this
yesterday
and i support the moves that they're
making there
across all those who are involved air
crew pilots and others
and that will only further strengthen
the system there's no doubt about that
and and
that's a welcome development and we'll
continue to support them in those
what's what efforts it sounds like
you've all abandoned the
hope of actually getting a national
definition do you not think that
as the federal government it's your
responsibility to give some
certainty to all australians about what
will happen
in the events of outbreaks well i don't
agree with your assessment
and i don't agree with your summing up
of
what the constitutional position is by
implication
the national cabinet has been able to
achieve things that hasn't been achieved
in so many other federated countries
around the world
and the point i was making to you is
that
state premiers take their
responsibilities for the public health
of people in their jurisdictions very
seriously
and if they feel that they want to have
a stronger
rule or a different set of rules to
exercise their responsibilities
then that is understandable that is
their
accountability that's the basis upon
which they're elected as governments
and where possible we seek to make these
things consistent
but what we need to look at is what the
result has been
and that is australia has had one of the
one of the most successful
outcomes in suppressing the virus in
this country of almost any other country
in the world
and i haven't finished and so i would
stress to you that
where we can work together we do and
where
states want to exercise their
responsibilities to have differing
arrangements well that's the federation
of australia
and we will continue to make that as
consistent as possible but as i said in
this case
the avalon outbreak actually matches the
national hotspot definition it actually
does
and and we've seen states respond along
those lines so
i i wouldn't take the same pessimistic
view
in the contact racing efforts for the
avalon cluster is the covered same fat
being used
in the avalon class has it managed to
track down any positive cases provided
the same use it has right across but
paul might want to add to that
down any so it's definitely being used
and you remember that it's it's really a
tool
that's that's uh to be used by the
contact tracers um
new south wales has i i would hazard
that they would actually
uh have the best contact traces in the
world and so they
with their manual processes with the qr
codes and everything else
that they're using as well as opal card
data all sorts of other ways of getting
that information
um they're getting a lot of information
about the about the people
from the people that are coming forward
getting tested and being questioned
uh they're putting the covert safe app
into that at the moment they haven't got
any extra information from that but this
is
absolutely crucial um as we move
if this virus was to move outside of the
northern beaches this is the way we will
find
those people uh if they're in contact so
please download the app
as we have in other cases without breaks
and so it is an important backstop
measure that actually integrates with
the other tools that are being
used diversification
um we're we're looking at other markets
other than china oh what countries
specifically are we looking to trade
with and um how long would they will
these new arrangements take
well let me stress already the
government has increased
the two-way trade that is covered by
trade agreements under our government
from 26
to 70 that's quite a big that's the
biggest
diversification of our trade
opportunities that this country has ever
seen
up to this point and the next two big
agreements we're working on is with the
uk and the european union which we've
been working on now for
some time ever since brexit basically
began with the referendum
we've been engaging with the uk on that
matter that obviously have to have
waited until they
finalized their arrangements with the eu
but at the same time we've been working
with the eu and
we would like to finalize that next year
and i've made that point
in my discussions with european leaders
that have been quite extensive
over the last six months
a lot of the a lot of the businesses in
accommodation tourism sector rely on
january
the income they earn that period to to
tide them over for the rest of the year
we're looking at cutting job keeper from
10 days i guess effectively
in the new year is there any thought
given to
maybe putting a pause on that or
providing any sort of further assistance
to those businesses that are going to be
hit
and given what you and professor kelly
was saying about it being localized on
the insular peninsula
do you think or do you think do you
think that
perhaps the states the other states may
be able to be in a position to lift
those border restrictions quite quickly
before the end of um
the christmas holidays for instance the
summer that all depends on the data
um it all depends on the data over the
next few days it may well be that what
we're seeing
in the avalon outbreak goes the same way
that the adelaide
outbreak went and it all comes and goes
in in that sort of period of time and
then
things can then restore to where they
were prior to that
we're not at that point yet to be able
to make those judgments and
hopefully in the next few days next week
that will become clearer but what we've
done all the way through
particularly managing in relation to the
economic
response to the pandemic is to ensure
we've been driven
and led by the by the evidence that
we're seeing and australia's economic
response
has been in in the top tier around the
world
i make this point that without job
keeper
over the course of this year the
doubling initially of the job seeker
payment
the the job trainer initiatives home
builder
the apprenticeship support programs all
of this
then the health response that has been
put in place around the country by the
states and territories would not have
been possible
the economic foundation and support that
was put in place by the commonwealth
government
enabled the public health response at a
state and territory level
the commonwealth bank rolled wrote the
cheque
that underpinned what has been an
outstanding health response
at a state and territory level the two
have gone together
and that's a partnership that i think
has made australia's response this year
stand out at an international level so
we're always careful how we apply these
things the dates and the and
the transitions are set um we've got no
plans to change any of those
and we'll see what happens over the next
week or so with the avalon outbreak but
at this stage i can't see any reason why
any of that would change
around the new zealand travel bubble has
this outbreak
delayed that further well the the
the travel bubble with new zealand is a
matter for new zealand
new zealanders are welcome to come to
australia um and that arrangement has
been going very successfully on the last
figure i had and i think was about nine
thousand new zealanders come through
it's probably more than that now paul
and without any incident whatsoever if
new zealand
wants us australians to be able to
travel to new zealand in the same way
then that's entirely a matter for new
zealand it's it's
well the last chat we had with it was
exactly that if if new zealand would
like to do that
fine that's great um but it's not a
decision for australia
it's a it's a matter for new zealand
australia has no
role to play in that decision whatsoever
you would cancel flights from the uk as
a result of the new strain following
what's happened in europe and canada
or do you believe that hotel quarantine
is as good a defense as cancelling
flights
well we have no plans to go down the
path you've suggested
and we always take the medical advice on
these things and as professor kelly has
just sort of set out
at this stage there's nothing to suggest
that such a significant action
would be warranted but we're always
mindful of the medical advice
on these things our hotel quarantine
system
has been a very effective and important
defense
in the vast majority of cases now of
course we all know what occurred in
victoria and we all know what has
occurred in
new south wales and a number of other
places on occasions
but i'd stress this it's not just about
the quarantine
it's also then about the response and
the behaviors that people follow
and so as we go into these these last
few days before christmas
i think it is good to be mindful and the
virus hasn't gone anywhere
i think it's important that we provide
support to each other particularly those
who are most affected at the moment
um i i really feel for those those small
businesses and medium-sized businesses
and
that who had their their businesses
disrupted again
but they know that the government has
been supporting them all the way through
now there's not a place i go to in this
country and my colleagues
where business owners come to us and say
job keeper
kept my employees and jobs job keeper
kept my business
in business so they know they understand
that the government has stood with them
over the course of this year
and i think the australian people
understand that as well through the
record levels of support that has been
provided
and we've been able to do that in in
partnership with the states and
territories to ensure that australia's
response has stood out
all around the world so as we go into
christmas while it's frustrating i know
and while it's disappointing deeply
disappointing
that some of the reunions that might
have happened this christmas for many
families
won't happen but they will happen in the
new year people will get together
we will get through this like we've got
through so many other events it's
important to stay calm
to follow the health advice to follow
the public health information that it's
available
to keep the covered safe behaviours and
practices in in place
and i think we've got a very good cause
and very good reason to trust what is
happening in new south wales at the
moment
and they really are continuing to
demonstrate their gold standard
when it comes to managing these issues
and i'm very hopeful that that will play
out even more positively in the days
ahead
thanks very much
that was scott morrison formally
announcing dr paul kelly as australia's
chief medical officer
after he's acted in the role for the
last few months the prime minister
saying there the northern beaches
outbreak
is incredibly frustrating and
disappointing for people whose christmas
plans have been disrupted
around the country political reporter
stephanie boris has been
watching on and joins me now stephanie
both the prime minister
and paul kelly highlighted the geography
of the northern beaches that people who
live on the peninsula tend to stay where
they are
that's right so basically paul kelly um
has grounds to say that basing the fact
that he grew up
on the northern beaches as a young boy
so he understands uh people that live in
that region and and the point that he
was trying to make that
at the moment with the cases we're
hearing about most of those people
do live on the northern beaches and from
a medical point of view they see that as
promising that this isn't spreading
throughout sydney i'll take you through
some of the figures so you get an
understanding of what we're seeing on a
daily basis so
17th of december there were three people
that tested positive to coronavirus
on the 18th it was 15 on the 19th of
december it was 23 people
on the 20th it was 30 people and today
the cases have reduced now down to 15.
now in terms of what we've seen a
response from all the different states
and territories as a result of this
outbreak
the prime minister today has said that
we can expect
similar situations to occur in coming
months while a vaccine still isn't
available so what we're seeing here
with the northern beaches being shut
down people from sydney not being able
to travel to places like queensland
victoria and wa
that would be the same thing that we'll
see if there was to be an outbreak
somewhere else so this is basically
becoming the new type of normal in a
covert 19 pandemic and one that we can
still unfortunately expect to see in the
months ahead once this case is under
control
so what are the ramifications if the
northern beaches cluster having on the
rest of the country
so aside from the border closures that
we've heard a lot about yesterday and
today
at a level here in canberra the
swearing-in ceremony for
a number of ministers was supposed to
occur tomorrow but that's now going
virtual because obviously uh it's being
not safe to be traveling and seeing
ministers move around the country at
this point in time
we also learned today that the federal
government has approved an additional
50 defense force members for victoria
they've requested further
assistance now those defense force
personnel will be taking on
a logistical role they won't be helping
with borders the prime minister today
making the point that
the role of defence is changing from
what it was earlier in the year
and they'll be more focused on hotel
quarantine rather than
doing those jobs on the border
checkpoints that will be left up to the
police force
further to that there were questions
around what this now means for the new
zealand
travel bubble uh we have had new
zealanders welcomed into australia for a
number of weeks now
that's still the case they're welcome to
come here uh but it is a question for
the new zealand government as to whether
they change that travel bubble now with
what we're seeing in sydney
any new zealanders going back to new
zealand do need to quarantine for two
weeks
and finally uh job keeper questions
around whether that will be
extended at the moment it's in place
until march
next year but the question put to the
prime minister today was
considering we're seeing businesses have
to shut their doors as a result of this
coronavirus outbreak
should that job keepers support be
extended past much
the prime minister today saying he
doesn't believe that will be necessary
but
i think as we've learned with 2020
anything can potentially change
yeah indeed it can we've seen a new
strain of coronavirus in the uk which
has resulted in some countries
closing borders to people from england
will australia follow suit
not at this stage but that's because
australia's situation is very different
you have to remember that
anyone coming from overseas into
australia has to quarantine for two
weeks in a hotel
and that actually isn't what's happening
in a lot of countries overseas so
countries in europe have been accepting
people from here there everywhere and
now because of this new strain in
england they're now starting to impose
restrictions so
professor paul kelly saying today he's
confident with the hotel quarantine
system we have in place
and that people that potentially have
that virus coming from london
will be in hotel quarantine and will be
looked after and he also made the point
this isn't the first time
we've seen a new strain of coronavirus
in fact there's been thousands of
different
types that have occurred since we heard
about the first case in december
last year okay stephanie boris reporting
there from canberra
a report into victoria's botched hotel
quarantine program
has been unable to determine who
commissioned the use of private security
and has slammed the andrews government
for failing to do proper analysis of the
plan
findings of the coat inquiry reveal that
while no request was made to victoria
police to provide the first tier
enforcement of hotel quarantine
the then chief commissioner of police
was consulted and
expressed a preference that private
security performed that role
and victoria police provide the backup
for more on the report i'm joined now by
the chair for the coalition for epidemic
preparedness innovation jane holton jane
holton thank you so much for your time
what's your reading of the report well i
think what the honourable
justice coat has done is a really
forensic and i think a very good
analysis
of a piece of public administration
which probably wasn't
the finest hour we've seen in public
administration around australia and what
she's done i think is
give a lot of important lessons and a
focus on how things
can be improved and i think the good
news is that the newly stood up
victorian quarantine
system has learned all of those lessons
and then probably a few additional
besides
but i think it does underscore the
importance of actually having good
well-founded public administration in
this country
is it problematic that it doesn't name
and can't name who made the decision to
employ private security
well i think uh in any decision-making
process it is important to be clear one
what the decision
is and then secondly to record who's
actually made those decisions this is my
point about
public administration there are risks
involved in all of these sorts of
decisions and making sure that those
risks have been properly considered
and then the decision making process is
properly documented
even if things are done at speed is one
of the important lessons that this
report
underscores so what do you put that down
to that not being able to name
an individual um was everyone honest and
transparent in their evidence to the
inquiry
well i didn't watch all of the evidence
the inquiry and i haven't seen i've
looked obviously at the summary of the
report that i haven't read every last
i think of about 500 pages so whether
there's specific criticism of
individuals i can't comment on
but i think the nature of very rapid
decision making
where you're in a very difficult
confusing sort of a time
we all know that is where mistakes get
made
there's a lot of history and public
administration where that has been
learnt before and so this is if you like
a kind of classic
failure and one of the things that you
try and impart
particularly to to people in
decision-making processes that they need
to
understand one the need for time and
proper process
but secondly that you actually keep a
contemporaneous and proper record of
these things
so it's an error she's drawn i think a
series of conclusions about how not to
repeat that error in terms of clarity
around governance
but in terms of why she wasn't able to
determine that i think she says herself
it probably wasn't clear even to the
people
who are party to those decisions you
talk about the need not to rush
implementing something like this
jennifer coate on daniel andrews said
the decision to embark on the hotel
quarantine program
in victoria was made by the premier
without any detailed consideration of
the risks
that such a program would entail the
evidence was
those risks were considerable
well that's true but let's remind
ourselves that nearly every other state
or territory around the country
also embarked on the establishment of a
quarantine program
they all stood that up in somewhere
between
24 and 48 hours which in my review
my national review made the comment that
this was a huge effort and it is true
that around the country mistakes were
made what we saw around the rest of the
country
was an acknowledgement of the need for
continuous improvement
and making sure that the governance
arrangements that governed
those quarantine systems were robust
an emergency management system
arrangement which is actually controlled
by the police for example in new south
wales
who really have been the exemplar of
these arrangements nationally but other
states have done very well as well
so what you actually see here is in a
number of the other states
an active process of continuous
improvement in how they've run their
crime team systems
so also acknowledge the criticism made
by justice code i do think we should
remind ourselves that the other states
same time frame just a different outcome
how do you think the victorian public
should feel about this finding given
that this outbreak led to
18 000 infections 801 deaths and
melbourne's extended harsh lockdown
well i think we all feel for the people
who've been through that circumstance
and we particularly feel and we're going
to
i'm sure um send out really good wishes
and warm regards to
families as we come into christmas the
families of people whose lives were lost
as a consequence
and this is a tragic situation it is
very very difficult for people
who've been through that and i think we
should all remember them as we sit down
for our christmas lunches this year
even if we're isolated on the northern
beaches of sydney so
so let's think about it this way um it
was extremely regrettable
there were obvious errors made here as a
consequence that program and those
arrangements were shut down i would make
the observation that several people have
left their jobs as a consequence
and the victorian system has now been
restored up with much clearer governance
with an absolutely laser-like focus on
infection prevention and control which
is what it needs
and a learning culture so what i'm
hoping
is that as we know they're already now
guests in hotel quarantine
in victoria and some of them are
probably watching this today
we know that that system is vastly
different to the system that was
implemented previously
jane holton really good to get your
thoughts thanks for joining us
my pleasure families in london and
southeast england have had their
christmas plans thwarted after the
british prime minister changed his mind
and implemented severe restrictions
infections in the uk are soaring hitting
as high as 35 000 daily cases
the sudden rise is believed to be driven
by a new variant of the virus
dr ver pushpak gupta a frontline doctor
who has been treating covert 19 patients
in the uk
says the situation has deteriorated
rapidly
look i was here two weeks ago and we
were talking about such a positive thing
with the united kingdom doing the
vaccination program being the first in
the world to do so
and how things have changed since then
um you know christmas has been canceled
we've got a very highly contagious
variant that is spreading across
southeastern england and london
and most of wales and i think alarm
bells have
gone out now to the entire world that
this variant could be
could be spreading to different shores
to different countries
and i think that's why uh you see the eu
and different countries taking uh
reciprocal
reciprocal action to stop flights coming
in from the united kingdom so
um yes uh we we do have a situation on
our hands that we need to act against
because this is a highly intelligent
enemy that adapts and evades
and so we got to be more proactive with
the way that we
uh we respond to uh the changes that are
that we're seeing in this virus
so some experts are saying it could be
up to 70 percent more transmissible than
the original iteration of the sars cov2
virus but it doesn't mean it's more
deadly does it
no absolutely it's it's um there was a
study done by
uh professor ravi gupta in cambridge
that showed that in
labs this variant was twice as
contagious
and faster spreading but that doesn't
necessarily mean that it's going to
cause
an increase in more mortality inside
the hospital when the patients are
admitted um and so we have to
really wait and see what what this new
variant brings about
in terms of the efficacy of the vaccine
against it in terms of the medications
that we have
um you know we have used against the
virus in the in the last few months
um it's really a waiting and watching
game but we got to be
very very proactive about this and
that's why the alarm bells went out by
the uk government today
um to two different governments around
the world it's also important to
understand
how this variant and this mutation came
about
so the the way the virus attacks our
cells is through the spike protein
the spike protein on the virus attaches
on to the ace receptors
in our lung cells and that's how it
gains entry into our cells
our vaccine that we we invented was uh
was dealing with
with an antibody response against this
particular
spike protein and now the virus has has
mutated itself to
uh uh with this particular spike protein
to cause an increase in its own efficacy
of infection so
um it's a battle that we have to be on
top of all the time and
and and that's what what's happening
here basically so what does that mean
then for the vaccine does that mean that
the
current fisa vaccine that's being rolled
out in the uk
will be ineffective against this
particular strain
look as far as all the experts uh know
so far
that's not the case i think that the
vaccine will be just as effective as it
was
against the original variant um but
again that's something that we need to
keep an eye on because it's only been
two
to three weeks that this variant has
been seen in the united kingdom
and um and the vaccine as i said does
work against this particular spike
protein
that the mutation has been seen in so we
got to keep an eye on how things
work out ever since this virus was was
met
was discovered our medications our
treatments have evolved and i think
we're going to have to continuously
evolve
um in our treatments as time goes down
you mentioned that christmas has
effectively been
cancelled there and a number of european
nations have also taken action to stop
flights
from the uk but some have done that just
for a short period of time so either a
24-hour window or a 48-hour window
why is it such a short period of time
yeah i was i was actually reading about
this earlier and i think
there's going to be a coordinated
response from the european union as to
what decision they make
in terms of the flights coming in from
the uk and so individual countries have
made their own decisions for
for this weekend period um especially
because there's a lot of travel going on
between
different countries in terms of uh
christmas and in view of christmas
so i think that they wanted to make an
emergency response
uh but they're going to do a more
coordinated response down the line now
i understand people are going to be
upset about christmas being canceled in
london
but you know as one of my colleagues
mentioned it's better to have a lockdown
christmas
than to have an icu new year and i think
that um
people will understand that yeah that's
a really interesting message
at the same time the us has given
approval to the moderna vaccine
how far off is the uk from doing the
same thing
i'm really not sure if the uk will be
looking at moderna at all i think
the uk had very high hopes on the
astrazeneca vaccine and the oxford
vaccine
um and as your the panel member that you
had before me uh mentioned that they
they did have a trial error in which
they had some dosing issues
but you know independent reviews have
shown that the vaccine is still very
effective
and in my opinion that will be the
vaccine that should be used for mass
inoculation for two reasons
one it is stored at a temperature of
minus two to minus eight degrees celsius
which is much easier to store
logistically than the fisa vaccine
or the moderna vaccine and two it is
being sold to the uk government at a
price of two
to three pounds which is peanuts so i
think that
the uk will want to wait uh until
astrazeneca and oxford confirm their
uh their vaccine dr ver pushback gupta
speaking to us earlier
now for the day sport news i'm joined by
tony armstrong in melbourne tony let's
look ahead to the boxing day test
and looks like the australian side will
remain unchanged yeah so in bad news for
the indian side it does look like the
aussies will go in
unchanged to next saturday's test karina
joe burns he returned to form and on his
way to making
that 51 runs unbeaten on on the weekend
on saturday
he did cop a knock to the elbow it was
confirmed this morning that his arm is
not broken
so he'll be able to play it doesn't look
like dave warner is going to get up to
be fit
he faces a race against time he's
already left sydney to come down to
melbourne to try to beat the
the quarantine type situation that looks
like we're going to have to deal with
will pukowski
he'll he's still dealing with that
concussion so he's likely to be uh ruled
out but then for the indian side
for rat coley he's gone home for the
birth of his child and fastballer
mohamed sharmi as well
he's out for the whole uh for the whole
series as well with a broken arm so
things going for bad
two worse for the indian side let's talk
about basketball the wnbl
season concluded in townsville yesterday
yes it did and the south side flies they
are the champions they won 99
to 82 over the townsville flyers they're
in a bit of trouble early they're only
up
by two points at the half and liz cambay
she didn't
she didn't feature very much in the
whole first half she put herself into
foul trouble but then
lalani mitchell she stepped up to win
the grand final mvp she scored
31 points in shot five of six from
beyond the yacht
now this season was played like many
this year under compromised conditions
in 55 days
all of the teams went up to far north
queensland into a hub
situation and uh just congratulations to
the whole competition for getting it
away and congratulations
to the flyers for their win well let's
stay with basketball the men's
competition will spend an extended
period of time in melbourne won't it
yes so it's kind of a bit of a it's it's
turning on its head i suppose victoria
had no sport now everyone's trying to
get down here
so the season proper starts on the 10th
of january and
there'll be 39 games played but then as
of the 20th
of feb there will be one month where
every single club
comes down to victoria to play in i
guess there will
be 36 games across four weeks with three
of those games
in regional victoria so the state
government's obviously
very excited to bring basketball into
melbourne
and uh yeah the season proper will be um
yeah played for uh
well the rest of the season will be
played out after that month
so tony talk us through the premier
league results from this morning
so leicester city are now in outright
second they took on
tottenham this morning and they won two
nil to go above tottenham a jamie vardy
brace off the back of a penalty and then
a deflection goal saw
leicester win 2 nil tottenham have
dropped two in a row now to
to the teams that sit one and two men
united as well they destroyed leeds
six two to move into third place and
that sets up a tantalising fixture
between leicester
and third place menu next saturday
evening aston villa
in the other matches they beat west brom
three-nil brighton and sheffield united
played out a one-all draw in the other
big match across the weekend liverpool
beat crystal palace
seven nil so that's all the action from
the premier league
yeah that liverpool result it was a good
one tony good to talk to you
you too time for a check of the weather
with nate byrne
there's a broad band of cloud across the
country at the moment
from the north west right down into the
southeast that's
largely thanks to a tropical low
pressure system that's been sitting in
the north of wa bringing
heavy rainfall more of that today with
damaging winds warnings in place
across northern wa and for western parts
of the territory as well
but the moisture that it's feeding in is
being picked up by some troughs over in
the east so we're also expecting heavy
falls in northern new south wales today
and later in victoria warnings current
for those could see some flash flooding
and in between the two of them plenty of
wet weather continuing
if you're in the south west or the
northeast though it's looking relatively
clear around the capitals bit of a mixed
bag for you brisbane a fine one it's
getting to 31.
after that we're talking rain developing
in sydney 24
and canberra 25 degrees for melbourne it
will be afternoon rain 23 the top
a couple of showers around for hobart 21
for you later it's aiming for 22 in
adelaide after a wet morning
it should dry up for this afternoon
perth you've got a sunny 33 and darwin's
looking some showers
possibly with a storm 31 will be the top
now that low pressure system is going to
stick around for a little bit
before weakening and moving westwards as
we move towards christmas that will
eventually allow the south to dry up but
the north still looking pretty active as
the monsoon continues
you're gonna have to wait if you're in
the south though for things to dry up
completely for tuesday brisbane's still
looking at a late
shower possibly some early showers in
sydney and there's a bit of wet weather
around for canberra
melbourne and hobart also expecting some
rain
the other capital is fine except darwin
where we'll see showers maybe with the
storm and another chilly top of 31.
thanks very much nate well before we go
let's recap the news
from this morning the northern beaches
cluster has risen to 83 cases
50 15 new cases have been diagnosed
today but that comes off the back of
30 cases yesterday so the total of 83
cases
after 38 000 tests were carried
out on sunday that is a national record
on
wednesday morning that's when the new
south wales premier gladys bureau jaclyn
will give details about what
restrictions will be
in place for christmas and whether that
lockdown will come
off out of effect for the northern
beaches region in time for christmas so
we will have more details on wednesday
morning about that but stay with us gem
of the nest we'll have more news for you
next
tonight poe speaks to stan i knew it
worked to my advantage
to play to what i looked like i've never
really
identified as being female or
asian you just want to do interesting
things stair grants one plus one
tonight at eight on abc and iview
they're swapping the classroom for the
pressure cooker there's only going to be
one winner tonight
it's not going to be like at school
where everyone gets a ribbon but will it
be
tom that's left feeling the heat you're
probably thinking what's smoke mean
it's very much the definition of utah
hard quiz kid special
wednesday 7 30 on abc and iview
it's been a year like no other
unprecedented
unimaginable unfathomable there's only
one way to look back on the year that
was
20 bloody 20.
[Applause]
anywhere anytime a summer of
entertainment awaits on
abc eye view
carried me to these places that i never
thought imaginable
together we can create a better future
so you're saying you're clean i decided
to stand up last night and i'll continue
to stand up
we're coming to you from the great
barrier reef which is life
it's in my dna put me in it
your summertime streaming is on abc eye
view
[Music]
quite serious situation that we're
worried about stay connected with the
abc listen app
get the latest local news and updates
from your region
we're going to stay with you so that
you're well informed download the abc
listen app
and stay connected today the prime
minister says there is still hope for a
covered normal christmas
as new south wales experiences a surge
in testing
we can hopefully see things returned to
covert normal
as soon as we possibly could hope to see
that occur a race against the clock for
travellers attempting to cross
borders before quarantine restrictions
kick in
[Music]
also ahead the victorian government has
slammed over failures in the inquiry
into the bungled hotel quarantine
program
and australian surfer tyler wright
claims a historic victory
at the maui pro
hello and welcome to abc news i'm gemma
vanessa
new south wales has recorded 15 new
coronavirus cases linked to the northern
beaches cluster
with more than 38 000 people tested in
the past day
reporter ishila malone is in chatswood
and claudia jambor is at coffs harbour
airport in the states north
ushler to you first what did the premier
have to say this morning
well as you mentioned gemma the premiere
announced that there are 15 new cases
today
that all of those are linked to the
northern beaches cluster
and that now makes a total of 83 cases
with that outbreak now there was a
record day of testing that you mentioned
as well with 38 000 people coming
forward for testing
now the premier said this the high
testing numbers and
the lower rate compared with yesterday
of new cases has given her
reason for cautious optimism but as she
said one day's result
doesn't make a trend now the concern
still remains that this cluster may
spread outside of the northern beaches
to other parts of sydney
and of course we know that people before
they tested positive had visited
a range of venues all around sydney and
there's a long
and growing list of venues where people
are being urged people who visited there
to get tested
now there are five cases for example
associated with a hairdresser
and two with a pub in sydney's inner
west
but the big question today everyone was
asking is what about
christmas people want to know what
restrictions will be in place for the
christmas holiday
now premiere has said that she's going
to wait till wednesday
to make a final call on that she said
she was
mindful of the importance of this
holiday but
for the for the community in general
things go up and down
if we see the trend continue in the next
few days obviously that will give us
more confidence to look at what
thursday and friday we know that for
many cultures and for many
people christmas eve is as important as
christmas day
so we are considering all of that in our
decision making but we also need to get
it right and to date i'm very pleased
with the balance we have in new south
wales i appreciate other state premiers
have
had a bit to comment about what we're
doing in new south wales but i'm
confident the strategies we have in
place are working
and i'm also confident in the people of
our great state
we've been used to doing the right thing
for a long time and
the results i think are demonstrating
that but it is very volatile
so we need to make sure we leave it to
the last possible moment before we make
a decision
initially the state opposition has
criticized the government's mass policy
yes the there's advice for people to
wear masks in
indoor areas like when they're shopping
or on public transport
at places of worship but the government
has
resisted making this mandatory i think
there's a reluctance to tie up resources
in enforcing
enforcing any restrictions they're
relying on people's goodwill
but we're out at chatswood today this
isn't on the northern beaches it is in
northern sydney but not in that northern
beaches
spot area there are a lot of people out
and about shopping but
i have seen quite a high level of mask
wearing
but the labour opposition in new south
wales they've been calling for some time
now for mass wearing to be mandatory
they say it's a no-brainer
that can stop the infections spreading
can help
stop the inspections of the infection
spreading
and again today the opposition leader
jody mckay
repeated the call for those restrictions
to be tightened up
now my stepdaughter caught the train the
other day and she sent me a photo and
she said
i am the only one on this train wearing
a mask and no one is social distancing
mass on public transport makes sense
we've been calling for this
since june our shadow transport minister
first
wrote to the minister in june requesting
mandatory mask wearing on public
transport
this is not new from labor we've been
calling on this
because we believe that public transport
is a high risk situation
yet we know how important it is to get
people to continue to go
to and from work and what's it like on
the northern beaches
well i've seen pictures this morning of
there were people out for example on
manly beach like
saw pictures of police going along
asking people to move on they were
moving people
on who were just sitting on the beach
there are a lot of people out about
exercising so at the moment it is the
advice is people if they're
going to work or education or if they're
out exercising or buying essentials they
can be outside
otherwise the advice is to stay at home
now
we have heard that many of the
communities up there many shopping
strips are very quiet
so by and large it would seem that
people are abiding by those restrictions
let's go to claudia at jamboree coughs
harbor now claudia what's happening
there
good afternoon gemma well the first
flight from sydney
has arrived into coffs harbour while
they have been flights previous this is
the first arrival where there's been
covert 19
screening so we've seen lots of very
jubilant
happy reunions but they have been very
covert safe all passengers aboard
that virgin flight that's just touched
down here in sydney were wearing masks
all of them lined up and went through a
screening process before going through
arrivals and reuniting with family and
friends
all were very happy but a lot of social
distancing in place
um and a lot of uh feelings of relief
that this is happening
given um our region's coffs harbour for
example
hasn't had community transmission of
covert 19
for more than six months so coming into
christmas
these safety measures are welcome and
what will the screening involve
so gemma everyone that comes off the
plane is wearing a mask they go up to a
new south wales health worker who will
ask them a series of questions
about where they've been how they're
feeling if they've been unwell
uh just to sound out how well they are
and if they need to indeed get a covered
test
whether that be precautionary or if it
is mandated by the public health orders
that apply
to greater sydney at the moment uh
temperatures are being taken
and if people are still unsure behind me
here
there is more health officials who will
be able to provide further advice if
people
are unsure about what the most safest uh
course of action
is to take so and i think that's really
good for visitors to
take responsibility and be very cautious
of their movements up here in the
regions if they are from greater sydney
but also for locals here it is very
reassuring
for them those that i've been speaking
to anyway have said it is a relief to
see screening at the airports just to
ensure that all safety precautions are
being taken to protect
regional new south wales from any
outbreak especially so close to
christmas in the new year
and claudia what is the mood like in
regional areas
well the mood there's a bit of anxiety
um lingering here
jammer and coughs harbor and the mid
north coast more broadly especially
because
over the weekend two cafes in foster
were flagged as having confirmed covert
cases
so one of those cafes underwent a deep
clean and the other is
still shut because staff are getting
covered tests so anxiety levels are high
here
on the mid north coast i spoke to
someone here at the arrivals
lounge here in coffs a little earlier
let's take a listen to what they had to
say
look it is in the back of my mind that
there is a potential for infected
passengers but given that the
the authorities are setting up the cover
testing here at the airport it is giving
me some reassurance that they are going
to get on top of it here
so that whoever needs to self-isolate
is directed to self-isolate and not get
in the taxi
i think they've been on top of it
pretty quickly but it's just how fast it
moves
so as you can see there gemma people
feeling pretty assured by the screening
and a little bit anxious but overall i'm
feeling pretty confident
um that all safety precautions are being
taken to protect areas like coffs
harbour and greater new south wales
claudia jambore at coffs harbour airport
and ursula malone in chatswood thank you
the prime minister says australians
should have confidence in how the
kovit-19 outbreak in new south wales is
being handled
scott morrison says he understands the
frustration and disappointment of those
who have had their christmas plans
disrupted
by the cluster on sydney's northern
beaches and he's told australians to
expect
similar responses if further outbreaks
occur
political reporter stephanie boris joins
us from parliament house
stephanie this particular outbreak has
had wide-ranging ramifications
for a number of australians what did the
prime minister have to say
well the prime minister decided to take
a focus on the number of cases that have
been recorded in new south wales today
that figure
being 15 which is much lower than
yesterday's cases of 30.
he went on to talk about new south wales
response and how they're handling this
outbreak he said people should have
confidence in the health authorities
and their work they're doing he pointed
to the fact that there's been
more than 38 000 tests completed
yesterday across
sydney which is pretty incredible rates
considering the number of people that
are staying home
and abiding by these different rules and
regulations that have put in place
to try and stem the outbreak from going
further
now what we're seeing at the moment is
not just restrictions for people on
sydney's northern beaches but this is
having ramifications for
people interstate they can't go to their
christmas celebrations anymore because
those border restrictions have been
enforced
meaning no one from greater sydney can
basically go anywhere
the prime minister making the point that
this is now going to become the new norm
if we
see similar outbreaks in the weeks and
months ahead but he made the point that
this is much better than how it was
being handled back in say march or april
where
everyone was in lockdown despite
coronavirus not being
across australia you can't ignore hot
spots you can't pretend they're not
there and they don't present a risk of
course they present a risk
and until we have a vaccine that is
reaching the necessary levels
that is required across the country then
these are the ways that we'll have to
practically
manage these issues but the difference
between now
and when we were dealing with outbreaks
six seven months ago
is like is night and day and the
restrictions have also affected plans in
canberra for the swearing-in ceremony
how is that now being handled so this
was expected to
take place tomorrow and it's a result of
scott morrison changing up his team
slightly on friday
he announced a reshuffle of his cabinet
so we've got dan tien moving into the
position
of trade minister and alan tuj taking on
the role as education minister so
usually the ministers head along to the
governor general's residence here in
canberra but that can't take place
due to the outbreak in sydney so it will
be held
virtually a lot of people across
australia would be familiar with this
sort of setup
given the year that we've had so that
will still occur tomorrow but just not
in person now
some other things to note out of the
press conference today with the prime
minister he
confirmed that an additional 50 defense
force members
are being sent to melbourne they'll be
helping with planning and logistics and
scott morrison saying
the role of the defence force with this
pandemic is actually changing and their
focus now
is on hotel quarantine and helping the
states and territories
run those hotel quarantine systems you
won't be seeing them on the borders
checking permits or people's licenses
scott morrison saying that's now up to
the states
to handle also a question around the job
keeper payment that's the one that's the
wage subsidy it's money given to
businesses that then have to pass it on
to employees
to ensure they keep their job and that
was introduced in march in order to make
sure that people
still had a connection to their employer
the question asked today given what
we're seeing on the northern beaches
these restrictions the fact that
a number of businesses have had to close
down
for a number of days could the job keep
our payment be extended past march this
year scott morrison saying not at this
stage but
as we know with 2020 anything can change
and a number of countries are now
shutting their borders to people from
the uk amid these fears of a new strain
emerging there
will australia follow suit no australia
will not follow suit and that's for a
number of reasons so if we just
first look at what's going on in the uk
there's this new strain that's emerging
it looks like it is a lot more
contagious than what they've seen in the
past
and as a result of that a number of
countries in europe have shut their
borders to anyone coming from the uk
now these countries don't have hotel
quarantine
systems in place like we do here in
australia so
basically what they're doing now is
almost catching up to what we do
in order to try and stop coronavirus
coming into australia and
the chief medical officer paul kelly has
today said that we need to put this in
perspective
and to remember that anyone coming from
overseas does have to undergo hotel
quarantine
and he's confident that if anyone has
this particular strain of covert 19
they'll be well cared for in hotel
quarantine
obviously there has been thousands of
mutations in this of this particular
novel coronavirus when it was you
remember that was what it was called
at the beginning it was a new
coronavirus it had a mutation to get to
there
uh is that there have been small
mutations along the way
but thousands of them in terms of what
that means uh for people coming from the
uk here
everyone coming from the uk is going
into into 14 days of hotel quarantine
and they are no risk uh as as that
quarantine works
uh so successfully as it has done for
the most part here in australia since
the beginning
and as a result of the outbreak that
we're seeing in sydney the ahpc is
meeting on a daily basis that of course
is the expert
medical panel that consists of a number
of medical experts from across the
different states and territories so
their meeting every day also transport
ministers met today
to talk through logistics of freight
getting between the different states and
territories
and all health ministers will be meeting
on wednesday to decide what happens over
the christmas period
stephanie boris at parliament house
thank you queenslanders are racing to
return home from the greater sydney area
after the region was declared a
coronavirus hotspot reporter george
roberts has more from brisbane
the rush is on for queenslanders caught
in greater sydney
to get home in time for christmas while
there had been some cancellations
about 22 flights are due to land here
in brisbane today with christmas plans
thrown into disarray
many of the passengers we've spoken to
have said that they've been frustrated
disappointed and even angry that the
premier anastasia palestine
didn't give queenslanders more time to
get home
basically like restrictions all changed
overnight and
we had to quickly book a flight like
next morning because
all the restrictions have changed so
fast and we've rushed back this morning
4am or something like that it was crazy
we booked this trip to cairns for
christmas because we knew the first time
the water's closed they're like um our
parents are not going to be coming up
from sydney
yeah and then we're like oh they might
be coming up and then
no closed again so we don't know when
we're going to see them
yeah because hopefully new year and now
it's looking
definitely not new year at this point
queenslanders now have until one o'clock
tomorrow morning or they'll be forced
into hotel quarantine at their own
expense
for those lucky enough to get on one of
the last flights today
it's still not a simple process we're
told it takes
40 minutes to two hours up in the
terminal before they can even get down
here and pick up their bags
they must have a border declaration pass
and police and health authorities
interview
every passenger before they